---
layout: post
title: Fed's Williams Re-iterated Rates to Stay High Until Job Is Done
categories: Fedspeak
tags: [policy, Williams]
article_excerpt: "In a speech, New York Fed President John Williams highlighted the 'significant progress' made in bringing down inflation and restoring economic balance. However, he emphasized that 'the journey is not yet over,' noting that despite progress, 'job vacancies...are still quite elevated relative to pre-pandemic norms' and 'wage growth...remain[s] above pre-Covid averages.' Williams stated that the FOMC 'has put in place a restrictive stance of monetary policy with the aim of bringing inflation back to 2 percent on a sustained basis.' He reiterated the Committee's stance that it 'does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent.' Williams expects inflation 'to continue its return journey to 2 percent, although there will likely be bumps along the way,' forecasting PCE inflation 'to be around 2 to 2-1/4 percent this year and 2 percent next year'"
---

<style>
    body {
        font-family: Arial, sans-serif;
    }
    .neutral {
        color: black; /* Ensuring text color is readable */
    }
    .dovish {
        background-color: lightblue; /* Changed from color to background-color */
        color: black; /* Ensuring text color is readable */
    }
    .most-dovish {
        background-color: blue; /* Changed from color to background-color */
        color: white; /* Changing text color to white for readability */
    }
    .hawkish {
        background-color: lightpink; /* Changed from color to background-color */
        color: black; /* Ensuring text color is readable */
    }
    .most-hawkish {
        background-color: red; /* Changed from color to background-color */
        color: white; /* Changing text color to white for readability */
    }
    .bold {
        font-weight: bold;
    }
  .underscored {
  text-decoration: underline;
}
  
</style>

### Speech Text

<p><span class="neutral">Good afternoon, everyone.</span> <span class="neutral">Thank you for having me here today.</span> <span class="neutral">I always enjoy meeting with business and community leaders in the Federal Reserve's Second District.</span> <span class="neutral">And it's a real treat to join you here at the Cradle of Aviation Museum.</span> <span class="neutral">It's a great reminder of Long Island's rich history in aeronautics and innovation.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">If only I had time to visit some of the space exhibits today.</span> <span class="neutral">Alas, maybe next time....</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">Instead, in my remarks, I will focus on how the Federal Reserve is working to achieve our goals of maximum employment and price stability.</span> <span class="dovish bold">I'll also discuss the significant progress we've seen in restoring balance to the economy and bringing inflation down to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC's) 2 percent longer-run goal.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">And I'll talk about what we still need to see for a full and sustained return to price stability.</span> <span class="neutral">Finally, I'll give my economic outlook.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">Before I get into all of that, I need to provide the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC or others in the Federal Reserve System.</span></p>

#### Falling Inflation, Low Unemployment

<p><span class="neutral">In thinking about the state of our economy today, and what that means for the future, it's important to start from where we've been.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">As business leaders, you know all too well the impacts of the pandemic.</span> <span class="neutral">In many ways, Long Island's economy mirrors New York City's.</span> <span class="neutral">Both were hit especially hard in 2020—in fact, much harder than what we saw nationally.</span> <span class="neutral">And in 2023, both reached an important milestone, returning to the number of jobs we had before the pandemic.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish">Last year was also a turning point for the U.S. economy.</span> <span class="dovish">Global supply chains, which were severely disrupted during the pandemic and early in the recovery, returned to normal.1</span> <span class="dovish">Demand came into better balance with supply.</span> <span class="dovish">And the economy grew far faster than anyone expected a year ago, boosted by increases in the labor force and productivity.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">At the same time, the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate under 4 percent—a mark it's held for the past two years, the longest stretch in five decades.</span> <span class="dovish bold">And inflation—as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index—continued to decline from its 40-year high of about 7 percent in mid-2022, reaching about 2-1/2 percent last year.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">Given that we are in a museum that houses an actual Lunar Module—and all eyes are on plans to return to the moon—I cannot resist the temptation to use the mission to send astronauts to the moon as a metaphor for the economy.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish">Like traveling to the moon and back, inflation shot up, then came back down.</span> <span class="hawkish">And as with the Apollo missions, it's the safe return home that's essential.</span> <span class="dovish">While we've seen great progress toward achieving our goals, the journey is not yet over, and I am very focused on making sure we complete this mission successfully.</span></p>

#### A Strong, More Balanced Labor Market

<p><span class="neutral">I'm going to spend some time digging deeper into the trends behind both sides of our dual mandate goals.</span> <span class="neutral">I'll start with employment.</span></p>

<p><span class="hawkish">As you'll recall, when the economy recovered from the pandemic, the labor market turned red hot.</span> <span class="hawkish">Demand for workers far exceeded supply, and that imbalance contributed to rapid wage growth and high inflation.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">Now, the labor market—both in the nation as a whole and here in the Second District—has shown signs of returning to something closer to normal.</span> <span class="dovish bold">Nationally, many indicators—such as quits rates and surveys of perceptions of availability of workers and jobs—have returned to around pre-pandemic levels.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">Throughout this process of getting into better balance, the labor market has remained strong.</span> <span class="neutral bold">The current unemployment rate of 3.7 percent is near my estimate for the unemployment rate that is likely to prevail over the longer run.</span> <span class="neutral bold">And job growth continues to be solid.</span></p>

<p><span class="hawkish">Despite the very real progress in restoring balance, two important indicators point to lingering tightness in the labor market: job openings and wage growth.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">Job vacancies, which reached all-time highs in the red-hot labor market of 2022, have trended lower since then, but are still quite elevated relative to pre-pandemic norms.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">And while we have seen measures of wage growth come down from their pandemic-era peaks, they remain above pre-Covid averages.</span></p>

#### The Return Trip of Inflation

<p><span class="dovish bold">That leads me to the other side of our mandate, price stability.</span> <span class="dovish bold">As I mentioned, inflation has declined significantly over the past year and a half.</span> <span class="dovish">This drop has been broad-based, encompassing decreases in inflation rates for food, energy, goods, and services.</span> <span class="dovish">The decline in inflation has benefited from a reduction in demand and supply imbalances, both here and internationally, and the resolution of global supply-chain bottlenecks.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral bold">One way to illustrate the dynamics of inflation is through the New York Fed's measure of underlying inflation, called the Multivariate Core Trend inflation (MCT).2</span> <span class="neutral">Before the pandemic, this measure was 1.8 percent, slightly below the FOMC's 2 percent inflation target.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">As inflation rose following the pandemic and the onset of Russia's war on Ukraine, it climbed sharply, peaking at about 5-1/2 percent in June of 2022.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">Since then, the MCT has fallen significantly, reaching 2.3 percent in December, reflecting declines in all the major categories of core inflation.</span> <span class="dovish">Like the flight path the Apollo missions took to the moon and back, the MCT's return trajectory is a mirror image of its rise.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">But, we still have a ways to go on the journey to sustained 2 percent inflation.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish">You see a similar round trip in measures of near- and medium-term inflation expectations.</span> <span class="dovish">According to the New York Fed's monthly Survey of Consumer Expectations, one- and three-year-ahead inflation expectations rose as inflation surged.</span> <span class="dovish bold">Since then, these measures have come back to Earth.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">One-year-ahead expectations are within the range seen in the years prior to the pandemic, and three-year-ahead expectations are now actually a bit below their 2014-2019 average.3</span> <span class="dovish">Other measures of inflation expectations show similar round-trip trajectories.</span></p>

#### Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook

<p><span class="dovish">In summary, the economy is strong, imbalances are diminishing, and inflation has come down but remains above our 2 percent longer-run target.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">What does that mean for monetary policy?</span></p>

<p><span class="hawkish bold">Over the past two years, the FOMC has put in place a restrictive stance of monetary policy with the aim of bringing inflation back to 2 percent on a sustained basis.</span> <span class="dovish">Given the progress we have seen, the risks to achieving our maximum employment and price stability goals are moving into better balance.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral bold">At its January meeting, the FOMC kept the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent.</span> <span class="hawkish bold">In announcing that decision, the Committee said it "does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent."4</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral bold">Taking into account the effects of restrictive monetary policy, I expect GDP growth to slow to about 1-1/2 percent this year, and the unemployment rate to rise modestly, peaking at around 4 percent.</span></p>

<p><span class="dovish bold">I expect inflation to continue its return journey to 2 percent, although there will likely be bumps along the way, as we saw in the most recent Consumer Price Index data.</span> <span class="dovish bold">To be specific, I expect PCE inflation to be around 2 to 2-1/4 percent this year and 2 percent next year.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">The risks to this forecast are two-sided.</span> <span class="hawkish">Inflation may surprise on the upside, or consumer strength—a major driver of the robust growth we saw in 2023—may fade more quickly than I anticipate.</span></p>

#### Conclusion

<p><span class="hawkish">Price stability is the bedrock upon which our economic prosperity stands.</span> <span class="dovish">While the economy has come a long way toward achieving better balance and reaching our 2 percent inflation goal, we are not there yet.</span> <span class="hawkish">I am committed to fully restoring price stability in the context of a strong economy and labor market.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">As we navigate the remainder of this journey, I will be focused on the data, the economic outlook, and the risks, in evaluating the appropriate path for monetary policy that best achieves our goals.</span></p>

<p><span class="neutral">Or, to paraphrase the words of the astronaut Alan Shepard, we'll assess incoming data until it's clear all systems are go.</span></p>
